ZEP for recovering out of disk space (#7)
zeebe-io/enhancements: ZEP000-prevent-ood.md

---
title: ZEP Enable brokers to recover from out of disk space due to exporter failure
authors:
  - Deepthi Akkoorath
reviewers:
  - TBD
approvers:
  - TBD
editor: TBD
creation-date: 2020-07-02
last-updated: 2020-07-02
status: implemented

---

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

When exporter is slow or not available, it prevents the broker from taking snapshot and compacting the log. Eventually the broker goes out of disk space. This ZEP proposes a solution to prevent the broker from reaching a non-recoverable state. When the exporter is healthy again, the broker should be able to compact the log eventually.

> The broker's strategy to prevent out of disk space is as follows. When the broker's disk space usage goes above a threshold

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The broker's strategy to prevent out of disk space is to react when the broker's disk space usage goes above a threshold, it will:
```

Zeebe brokers compacts the event log periodically to free up the disk space. An event from the log can be removed only if it is processed, exported and a snapshot incuding the results of that event is persisted. It can happen that the event is not compacted because it is not exported due to some failures in the exporter such as the exporter is not available for a period or it is too slow that new events are produced much faster than it is exported. This results in increased disk usage and at some point the broker goes out of disk space. This leads to another problem that the broker cannot take snapshot because there is no space for the snapshot and as a result it cannot compact the logs leading to a non-recoverable state.

To prevent the broker from reaching such a non-recoverable state, we have the following proposal.

# Guide-level explanation
[guide-level-explanation]: #guide-level-explanation

This feature add new configuration parameters.

- data.diskUsageCommandWatermark
- data.diskUsageReplicationWatermark
- data.diskUsageMonitoringInterval

`diskUsageCommandWatermark` and `diskUsageReplicationWatermark` is specified as percentage of total disk space.

> When the disk usage of a broker grows above `diskUsageCommandWatermark` then all new user commands directed towards the partitions for which this broker is the leader will be rejected with a 'RESOURCE_EXHAUSTED' error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the disk usage of a broker grows above `diskUsageCommandWatermark` then all new user commands directed towards the partitions for which this broker is the leader will be rejected with a `RESOURCE_EXHAUSTED` error and a specific error message.
```

> When disk space available on the broker is greater than `diskUsageReplicationWatermark` then the followers reject replication of events.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the disk space usage on the broker is greater than `diskUsageReplicationWatermark` then the followers reject replication of events.
```

Note that we don't trigger fail over when a leader goes out of disk space, because if the follower is also out of disk space it will lead to a situation where we can never recover. On the other hand, if the leader waits until the exporter failure is resolved, it can eventually take a snapshot and compact.

- Does the ZEP affect the official Zeebe distribution (e.g. configuration, logging)?
	- It add new configuration parameters
- Does the ZEP require coordination with the platform team? - May be - to find an optimal value for the parameters
- Does the ZEP require coordination with the Operate team? - No

## Compatibility

There are no compatability breaking changes.

## Testing

> You should describe what is the overall functionality that should be tested.
> 
> If you are omitting tests, explain why, and explain the impact if it fails, specifically the worst case scenario.
> 
> In each of the sections below, we should already list known cases that need to be tested in the final implementation, and at which level. The initial version here should be a best of effort: it is perfectly acceptable and expected that this section will be amended during implementation.

Reviewer: We can remove that or?

```suggestion

```

> ### Unit

Reviewer: I think we can also have unit test for the smaller components, to see/verify that they react correctly on listener call ?

The proposed design is simple to implement and helps to recover from out of disk space when the main reason is exporter failure.

In the cloud it is possible to increase the size of pvc. That would help to recover in many cases. However it requires manual intervention.

# Prior art
[prior-art]: #prior-art

ElasticSearch uses similar parameters to transition to a read-only mode when the disk usage crosses a threshold.

# Out of scope
[out-of-scope]: #out-of-scope

* Preventing out of disk space due to internal load. If there are lot of timers, it is possible that there are lot of timer events in the log, but the stream processor is incapable of processing them at the same rate as they are written. This can also lead to Out of disk space as the stream processor is way behind and we cannot compact. To prevent this case we need a solution where we stop writing these internal events, at the same time let the stream processor continue so that eventually a snapshot is taken and the log is compacted.

# Unresolved questions
[unresolved-questions]: #unresolved-questions

# Future possibilities
[future-possibilities]: #future-possibilities

> * Use heuristics to calculate `highDiskSpaceUsageWatermark`. We can estimate the snapshot size from the size of runtime. Ensure that there is enough disk space to take the snapshot.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Use heuristics to calculate `diskUsageReplicationWatermark`. We can estimate the snapshot size from the size of runtime. Ensure that there is enough disk space to take the snapshot.
```
